PEP 639: Post-split edits (language simplification, deeper edits of sections) (#3743)
python/peps: peps/pep-0639.rst

Abstract
========

This PEP defines a specification how licenses are documented in the Python
projects.

To achieve that, it:

> - Adopts the `SPDX license expression syntax <639-spdx_>`__ as
>   means of expressing Python projects' license.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Adopts the `SPDX license expression syntax <639-spdx_>`__ as a
  means of expressing the license for a Python project.
```

- Defines how to include license files within the projects, source and built
  distributions.

- Specifies the necessary changes to :term:`Core Metadata` and
  the corresponding :term:`Pyproject Metadata key`\s

- Describes the necessary changes to related specifications,
  namely the `source distribution (sdist) <sdistspec_>`__,
  `built distribution (wheel) <wheelspec_>`__ and
  `installed project <installedspec_>`__ standards.

> - :ref:`Provides clear guidance <639-spec-converting-metadata>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- :ref:`Provides guidance <639-spec-converting-metadata>`
```
This word doesn't add any meaning here.

  for authors and tools converting legacy license metadata.

This will make license declaration simpler and less ambiguous for
package authors to create, end users to understand,
and tools to programmatically process.

The changes will update the
`Core Metadata specification <coremetadataspec_>`__ to version 2.4.

.. _639-goals:

Goals
=====

This PEP's scope is limited to covering new mechanisms for documenting
the license of a :term:`distribution package`, specifically defining:

- A means of specifying a SPDX :term:`license expression`.
- A method of including license texts in :term:`distribution package`\s
  and installed :term:`Project`\s.

The changes that this PEP requires have been designed to minimize impact and
maximize backward compatibility.

.. _639-non-goals:

Non-Goals
=========

This PEP doesn't recommend any particular license to be chosen by any
particular package author.

If projects decide not to use the new fields, no additional restrictions are
imposed by this PEP when uploading to PyPI.

This PEP also is not about license documentation for individual files,
though this is a :ref:`surveyed topic <639-license-doc-source-files>`

> in an appendix, and nor does it intend to cover cases where the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in an appendix, nor does it intend to cover cases where the
```

This often leads to confusion both for package authors
and end users, including distribution re-packagers.

This has triggered a number of license-related discussions and issues,
including on `outdated and ambiguous PyPI classifiers <classifierissue_>`__,
`license interoperability with other ecosystems <interopissue_>`__,
`too many confusing license metadata options <packagingissue_>`__,
`limited support for license files in the Wheel project <wheelfiles_>`__, and
`the lack of clear, precise and standardized license metadata <pepissue_>`__.

As a result, on average, Python packages tend to have more ambiguous and
missing license information than other common ecosystems. This is supported by
the `statistics page <cdstats_>`__ of the
`ClearlyDefined project <clearlydefined_>`__, an
`Open Source Initiative <osi_>`__ incubated effort to help
improve licensing clarity of other FOSS projects, covering all packages
from PyPI, Maven, npm and Rubygems.

The current license classifiers could be extended to include the full range of
the SPDX identifiers while deprecating the ambiguous classifiers
(such as ``License :: OSI Approved :: BSD License``).

> However, there are multiple reasons against such approach:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, there are multiple arguments against such an approach:
```

- :ref:`License-Expression <639-spec-field-license-expression>` that
  provides an unambiguous way to express the license of a package
  using SPDX license expressions.

- :ref:`License-File <639-spec-field-license-file>` that
  offers a standardized way to include the full text of the license(s)
  with the package when distributed,
  and allows other tools consuming the :term:`Core Metadata`
  to locate a :term:`distribution archive`'s license files.

Furthermore, this specification builds upon
existing practice in the `Setuptools <setuptoolsfiles_>`__ and
`Wheel <wheelfiles_>`__ projects.
An up-to-date version of the current draft of this PEP is
`already successfully implemented <hatchimplementation_>`__ in the popular
PyPA `Hatch <hatch_>`__ packaging tool, and an earlier draft of the
:ref:`license files portion <639-spec-field-license-file>`
is `implemented in Setuptools <setuptoolspep639_>`__.

.. _639-terminology:

Terminology
===========

The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL"
in this document are to be interpreted as described in :rfc:`2119`.

.. _639-terminology-packaging:

> Packaging terms

Reviewer: This section feels like it should be a standalone PR to the packaging spec directly.

Author: I had similar feeling. Could we do that, @CAM-Gerlach?

Author: Done in https://github.com/pypa/packaging.python.org/pull/1541; references changed in c3c6e446381667b68d777404a093f75d49f3e3d2

    project root directory
        The filesystem directory in which
        a :term:`Project`'s :term:`source tree` is located.

    project source tree
    source tree
        The on-disk format of a :term:`Project` used for development,
        containing its raw source code before being packaged
        into a :term:`source distribution` or :term:`Built Distribution`.

    source distribution
    sdist
        A :term:`distribution archive` format
        (generated using, e.g., ``python -m build --sdist``)
        that provides the :term:`Core Metadata` and essential source files
        needed by a build backend (as defined in :pep:`517`)
        to generate a :term:`Built Distribution`.

    Wheel format
    Wheel
        The standard :term:`Built Distribution` format
        originally introduced in :pep:`427`
        and currently defined by
        the PyPA spec :ref:`packaging:binary-distribution-format`.
        Not to be confused with its reference implementation,
        the :term:`Wheel project`.

    Wheel project
        The PyPA reference implementation of the :term:`Wheel format`.
        To avoid ambiguity with the latter,

>         Will be consistently referred to as such here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        the project will be consistently referred to as such here.
```

documented in the `SPDX specification <spdxpression_>`__, either
Version 2.2 or a later compatible version.

A license expression can use the following :term:`license identifier`\s:

- Any SPDX-listed license short-form identifiers that are published in the
  `SPDX License List <spdxlist_>`__, version 3.17 or any later compatible
  version. Note that the SPDX working group never removes any license
  identifiers; instead, they may choose to mark an identifier as "deprecated".

- The ``LicenseRef-Public-Domain`` and ``LicenseRef-Proprietary`` strings, to
  identify licenses that are not included in the SPDX license list.

Examples
''''''''

Examples of valid SPDX expressions:

.. code-block:: none

    MIT
    BSD-3-Clause
    MIT AND (Apache-2.0 OR BSD-2-clause)
    MIT OR GPL-2.0-or-later OR (FSFUL AND BSD-2-Clause)
    GPL-3.0-only WITH Classpath-Exception-2.0 OR BSD-3-Clause
    LicenseRef-Public-Domain OR CC0-1.0 OR Unlicense
    LicenseRef-Proprietary

Examples of invalid SPDX expressions:

.. code-block:: none

    Use-it-after-midnight
    Apache-2.0 OR 2-BSD-Clause

.. _639-spec-core-metadata:

Core Metadata
-------------

> This PEP specifies following changes to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This PEP specifies the following changes to the
```

including at least the license files matching the above patterns, unless the
user has explicitly specified their own.

Examples of valid license files declaration:

.. code-block:: toml

    [project]
    license-files = { globs = ["LICEN[CS]E*", "AUTHORS*"] }

    [project]
    license-files = { paths = ["licenses/LICENSE.MIT", "licenses/LICENSE.CC0"] }

    [project]
    license-files = { paths = [] }

    [project]
    license-files = { globs = [] }

Examples of invalid license files declaration:

.. code-block:: toml

    [project]
    license-files.globs = ["LICEN[CS]E*", "AUTHORS*"]

>     license-file.paths = ["LICENSE.MIT"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    license-files.paths = ["LICENSE.MIT"]
```
Also, it's confusing that none of the "valid" examples above use the dotted syntax. That made me think that there was something invalid about the dotted syntax.

Author: Good point, will rework that.

Reason: license-files.paths and license-files.globs are mutually exclusive.

.. code-block:: toml

    [project]
    license-files = { paths = ["..\LICENSE.MIT"] }

Reason: ``..`` must not be used.

> ``\`` is invalid path delimiter, ``/`` must be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``\`` is an invalid path delimiter, ``/`` must be used.
```

description or vice versa.

The legacy deprecated Core Metadata ``License`` field, ``license`` key table
subkeys (``text`` and ``file``) in the ``pyproject.toml`` ``[project]`` table
and license classifiers will retain backwards compatibility. A removal would be
left to a future PEP and a new version of the Core Metadata specification.

Specification of the new ``License-File`` Core Metadata field and adding the
files in the distribution codifies the existing practices of many packaging
tools. It is designed to be largely backwards-compatible with their existing
use of that field. The new ``license-files`` key in the ``[project]`` table of
``pyproject.toml`` will only have an effect once users and tools adopt it.

This PEP specifies that license files should be placed in a dedicated
``licenses`` subdir of ``.dist-info`` directory. This is new and ensures that
wheels following this PEP will have differently-located licenses relative to
those produced via the previous installer-specific behavior. This is further
supported by a new metadata version.

This also resolves current issues where license files are accidentally

> replaced if they have the same names in different places, making wheel

Reviewer: ```suggestion
replaced if they have the same names in different places, making wheels
```

As such, it would be useful to have a more concrete rationale and use cases for
the back-filled data in order to come to a final consensus on this matter.

Therefore, is the status quo acceptable, allowing tools to decide this for
themselves? Should this PEP recommend, or even require, that tools back-fill
this metadata (which would presumably be reversed once a breaking revision of
the metadata spec is issued)? Or should this not be explicitly allowed, or even
prohibited?

Should custom license identifiers be allowed?
---------------------------------------------

The current version of this PEP specifies the possibility to use the
custom identifiers ``LicenseRef-Public-Domain`` and ``LicenseRef-Proprietary``
to handle the cases where projects have a license, but there is not a
recognized SPDX license identifier for it. For maximum flexibility, custom
``LicenseRef-<CUSTOM-TEXT>`` license identifiers could be allowed. In some cases
``LicenseRef-Proprietary`` may not be appropriate or specific enough, but
package authors could still want to benefit from the mainstream Python build
tooling.

However, this could increase the confusion about licensing. Custom identifiers

> can not be checked for correctness and users may think they always have to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cannot be checked for correctness and users may think they always have to
```
